micro-ROS handling memory tutorial (#99)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/micro/memory_management/memory_management.rst

.. _tutorials_micro_memory_management:

Memory management
=================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

> micro-ROS Client provides a full control over the memory usage during build, configuration and runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
micro-ROS Client provides full control over the memory usage during build, configuration and runtime.
```

> This is one the most important requisites in order to fit in low resources system and also in order to guarantee a hard real-time operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is one of the most important requisites in order to fit in low resources system and to guarantee a hard real-time behaviour.
```

> The memory management in micro-ROS Client can be configured at multiple levels so the user can use different mechanisms for fitting its requirements within the micro-ROS environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Memory management in micro-ROS Client can be configured at multiple levels so the user can use different mechanisms for fitting its requirements within the micro-ROS environment.
```

In general, micro-ROS by default will use:

* Static allocated memory in **build time**
* A bounded stack memory consumption
* A bounded amount of **dynamic memory** during entity creation and destruction (configuration time)
* Zero **dynamic memory** during runtime

.. TODO(pgarrido): Link to profiling article

> During a micro-ROS Client application development the user is able configure the memory at multiple level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a micro-ROS Client application development the user is able to configure the memory at multiple levels.
```

Along the following sections, those levels are analyzed in detail.

.. _tutorials_micro_memory_management_allocators:

Allocators
----------

> As in the ROS 2 stack, in the micro-ROS stack the dynamic memory allocators can be customized at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in the ROS 2 stack, micro-ROS dynamic memory allocators can be customized at runtime.
```

.. code-block:: c

  allocator = rcutils_get_zero_initialized_allocator();
  allocator.allocate = custom_allocate;
  allocator.deallocate = custom_deallocate;
  allocator.reallocate = custom_reallocate;
  allocator.zero_allocate = custom_zero_allocate;

  rcutils_set_default_allocator(&allocator);

A reference implementation of those allocators is:

.. code-block:: c

  void * custom_allocate(size_t size, void * state)
  {
    // Allocate and return a memory chunk of `size` bytes.
  }

  void custom_deallocate(void * pointer, void * state)
  {
    // Deallocate memory chunk pointed by `pointer`.
  }

  void * custom_reallocate(void * pointer, size_t size, void * state)
  {
    // Reallocate memory chunk pointed by `pointer` to `size` bytes.
  }

  void * custom_zero_allocate(size_t number_of_elements, size_t size_of_element, void * state)
  {
    // Allocate and return a memory chunk of `number_of_elements * size_of_element` bytes, filled with zeros.
  }

One example implementation of the most basic allocator that targets platforms where no ``libc`` allocators are available is:

.. note::

  This is a naive implementation of an allocator that does not allows memory deallocation.

>   User shall be aware of using `free_all_heap()` when the micro-ROS entities are no longer required.

Reviewer: Maybe place this note below the code?

Author: Fixed here: 9463bbfeeccd4acfd5fba0677ba74ec79a2782d3

.. code-block:: c

    static uint8_t heap[HEAP_SIZE];
    static size_t current_pointer = 0;

    void free_all_heap()
    {
        current_pointer = 0;
    }

    void assert_position()
    {
        if (current_pointer >= sizeof(heap)) {
            // Handle memory error
            while(1){};
        }
    }

    #define SYSTEM_ALIGNMENT 4

    size_t align_size(size_t size)
    {
        if (size % SYSTEM_ALIGNMENT != 0) {
            size += SYSTEM_ALIGNMENT - (size % SYSTEM_ALIGNMENT);

>         }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        }
        return size;
```
I guess?

    When receiving data, and all ``RMW_UXRCE_MAX_HISTORY`` are occupied, the reception entity behavior is determined by History QoS.

Entity Names
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Regarding the name of entities, topics and types, the user can configure the maximum length of the name by means of the following flags:

- ``RMW_UXRCE_NODE_NAME_MAX_LENGTH``: Maximum number of characters for a node name. Default value: 60.
- ``RMW_UXRCE_TOPIC_NAME_MAX_LENGTH``: Maximum number of characters for a topic name. Default value: 60.
- ``RMW_UXRCE_TYPE_NAME_MAX_LENGTH``: Maximum number of characters for a type name. Default value: 100.

.. _tutorials_micro_memory_management_message_memory:

Message memory
--------------

Message memory handling is an important part of the micro-ROS Client memory handling due to the fact that **micro-ROS Client does not initialized by default the type memory**.
This means that the user must initialize the type memory before using it.
This consideration needs to be taken into account both for outgoing and incoming messages.

.. warning::

>     micro-ROS provides an API for initializing the type memory that can be found in :ref:`micro-ROS Types Utilities<tutorials_micro_utilities_type_utilities>`.

Reviewer 2: I think `Note` suits better here than `warning`

Author: Agree... but I want users to understand that this section is for understanding purposes and that they have the API. I want more than a note but less than a warning

Author: Fixed here: 9463bbfeeccd4acfd5fba0677ba74ec79a2782d3

    {
        int32_t* data;    /* The pointer to an array of int32 */
        size_t size;      /* The number of valid items in data */
        size_t capacity;  /* The number of allocated items in data */
    } rosidl_runtime_c__int32__Sequence;

In that sense, a developer that instantiate a ``mypackage__msg__MyType mymsg;`` variable, should ensure that ``mymsg.values.data`` has memory for storing up to ``mymsg.values.capacity`` values and ``mymsg.values.size`` shows how many element are currently in the sequence, as shown in the following example:

.. code-block:: c

    mypackage__msg__MyType mymsg;

    // mymsg.values.data is NULL or garbage now
    // mymsg.values.size is 0 or garbage now
    // mymsg.values.capacity is 0 or garbage now

    // Assigning dynamic memory to the sequence
    mymsg.values.capacity = 100;
    mymsg.values.data = (int32_t*) malloc(mymsg.values.capacity * sizeof(int32_t));
    mymsg.values.size = 0;

    // Assigning static memory to the sequence
    static int32_t memory[100];
    mymsg.values.capacity = 100;
    mymsg.values.data = memory;
    mymsg.values.size = 0;

    // Filling some data
    for(int32_t i = 0; i < 3; i++){

>         mymsg.values.data = i;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        mymsg.values.data[i] = i;
```

For example, a complex ``.msg`` can be described as follows:

.. code-block::

    # MyComplexType.msg
    std_msgs/Header[] multiheaders
    int32[] values
    float64 duration
    int8[10] coefficients
    string name

In this case, the generated structure will be:

.. code-block:: c

    typedef struct mypackage__msg__MyComplexType
    {
    std_msgs__msg__Header__Sequence multiheaders;
    rosidl_runtime_c__int32__Sequence values;
    double duration;
    int8 coefficients[10];
    rosidl_runtime_c__String name;  // equal to rosidl_runtime_c__char__Sequence
    } mypackage__msg__MyComplexType;

In this case ``multiheaders`` is a **sequence type of compound type member**.
It shall be handled correctly and recursively by the user, as in the following example:

.. code-block:: c

    mypackage__msg__MyComplexType mymsg;

    // Init the multiheaders sequence
    mymsg.multiheaders.capacity = 10;
    mymsg.multiheaders.data = (std_msgs__msg__Header*) malloc(mymsg.values.capacity * sizeof(std_msgs__msg__Header));
    mymsg.multiheaders.size = 0;

    // Filling some data
    for(int32_t i = 0; i < 3; i++){

>         mymsg.values.data = i;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        mymsg.values.data[i] = i;
```

        // Add memory to this sequence element frame_id
        mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.capacity = 100;
        mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.data = (char*) malloc(mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.capacity * sizeof(char));
        mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.size = 0;

        // Assigning value to the frame_id char sequence
        strcpy(mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.data, "Hello World");

>         mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.size = strlen(mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.data);

Reviewer: Should this include the null terminator for size?
```suggestion
        mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.size = strlen(mymsg.multiheaders.data[i].frame_id.data) + 1;
```
